---
title: 'Excitement - Victory Lutheran, Medicine Hat'
tags:
- speaking
- pd
---

{% youtube 3L7k9JH_imo %}

## What's Wycliffe?

When my supervisor first joined Wycliffe many years ago, she said they used to call us "Canada's best kept secret". I asked one potential supporter what he knew about Wycliffe and he said he thought we were a "print shop"... that we print paper Bibles. Like Gideons, perhaps.

That person didn't know that Wycliffe:

- Creates new alphabets for languages that cannot be written down.
- Provides physical and on-screen keyboards for minority languages. These are the basic tools of literacy.
- Teaches people to read.

And with literacy comes education, equality, and economy.

Wycliffe brings Scripture to people who have none. We alleviate Bible poverty. There are over 7,000 languages spoken on earth today. 2,000 haven't a single verse of Scripture. Many of those are the languages that can't yet be written down.

You may know all this about Wycliffe too. We transform lives and entire civilizations with God's Word. To education, equality, and economy we write a story told in eternity. Wycliffe is a world-wide organization, and I am just one more servant with the privilege of being called to build God's Kingdom and to change this world.

## Who am I?

My mission with Wycliffe will be carried out here at home. I was born and raised in Calgary, Alberta. I am _at least_ two generations removed from any family church tradition. Growing up, we didn't even attend church at Christmas and Easter. God's Word transformed my life on July 28, 2003 when I said _Jesus, you can do with me whatever you want from now on. My life is in your hands_. Two years later I found myself at Ambrose Seminary. I hold a Master of Divinity and a Master of Science in Computer Science from the University of Calgary. My graduate research concerned Artificial Intelligence with an eye toward organizational automation. I have a wife and four children and have been teaching Web Development for the last four years in addition to many entrepreneurial pursuits and serving in our church, Saint Peter's Lutheran in Cochrane.

When I left university, I was immediately employed as a Web Developer. Computers execute software written my computer programmers. A Web Developer is a computer programmer who writes software for delivery over the World Wide Web. Software plays a huge role in Wycliffe's world-wide translation effort. We are a high tech organization with a history of early adoption of communication technologies. I attended a work convention in Dallas earlier this year, I was pleased to be surrounded by many _actual_ Computer Scientists. Conversations with these men and women were fascinating because of their many years practicing their discipline. Though I'm not the youngest member, at forty years old, I'm still very much the _new kid_. Wycliffe is an _old_ organization and is still Canada's best kept secret. At one fundraising meeting, I shared Wycliffe's work with a potential young supporter. He said, "I always thought of Wycliffe as my _grandma's_ organization".

## What do I do at Wycliffe?

Once my missionary budget is proven sustainable, I'm slated to join work on a translation tool called ScriptureForge. This is a web application and I am a web developer. I am badly needed and there is a job waiting for me right now. The reality is, however, I may never contribute to that project.

Since November, I've asked 102 individuals and couples to invest in my work. So far, I have filled 12% of my budget. At this rate, I will need to talk to 900 more people to get up to full support. Wycliffe and I were expecting to have met my budget by this past February. My efforts are closely scrutinized, and I've been held accountable to Wycliffe's expectations. With all this in mind, four weeks ago, one of my fundraising coaches said, _How do we let go and let God?_ Clearly, launching my mission is going to take a miracle.

## How am I serving Wycliffe now?

My coach's question came at the right time, because I had already recognized a fundraising opportunity within the Wycliffe organization itself. If you've worked for a company of reasonable size, you know that paperwork can make it hard to do your job. Management establishes paperwork processes which tend to get more complex over time. Wycliffe is the largest organization of which I've been a part, and it's been around for almost 80 years. As you can imagine, there are many opportunities to cut red tape and operating costs.

Currently, the work generated by the expense claim process hardly makes it worth the time and effort. Paperwork is a real problem. Computer programmers solve problems with machines. The opportunity God has laid before me is rooted in the fact that Wycliffe currently pays people money to do the work of machines. There is support to be raised by reducing operating costs and claiming part of the savings for my mission.

In _letting go and letting God_, I took a step back from actively pursuing new support contacts and took a look at one of the problems created by paperwork at Wycliffe. Like when running a business, a missionary can deduct certain expenses from his taxes. We call these _ministry_ expenses. Here's how I claim a ministry expense:

1. Fill out an Excel spreadsheet. This is already problematic because I don't own Microsoft Excel.
2. Using an open source spreadsheet option, I fill in a bunch of rows and columns with the receipt totals, items purchased, and the justification for each expense.
3. I scan every paper receipt and save a file in a very particular naming format. Other receipt documents like PDFs and emails are treated the same. 
4. Cross reference each invoice document with the line items on the spreadsheet.
5. Bundle all the paperwork in a Zip file and email a copy to my supervisor and the Finance team.
6. Each side looks at the expenses and either approves or asks for corrections.
7. Once approved, both my supervisor and the ministry expense clerk print a paper copy and have me sign twice.

As of January, I am no longer expected to submit the paper receipts themselves, though now I have to keep them in my filing cabinet for a whole year.

I have simplified this process for myself, my fellow missionaries, and the Wycliffe administration. I call this app the _Ministry Expense Reimbursement Manager_, or _merman_ for short.

Most at Wycliffe recognize the mutual opportunity I bring to the table, though even this one small improvement is meeting with resistance. The project I have undertaken has been affirmed by my various supervisors and coaches and is in beta production right now. A handful of testers provide their feedback. As a professional, test-driven web developer, I am able to be responsive in producing an application that is easy to use and simplifies an existing administrative process.

Wycliffe members gather every Wednesday for a time of worship and prayer. Sky-rocketing administrative costs appear regularly in our prayer requests. For Wycliffe, the skills I bring to the organization are an answer to actual prayers. 

This is the opportunity currently presented to me and Wycliffe. I am looking to raise temporary support by reducing operating costs. `merman` is only one of many opportunities. I know Wycliffe is eager for me to start work as quickly as possible, because my application took four months to process. I'm told this is record time. By comparison, the earliest viable version of `merman` was written and deployed in four weeks. 

Though operating costs present an exciting support-raising opportunity, this money will eventually dry up because I do my job correctly. Looking toward the future, I still need financial partners to enable me to support the world-wide translation effort. I like building up Wycliffe the organization, but ultimately my skills are best applied in enabling Wycliffe translators to do more translation work, more efficiently. It is for this efficiency that I program machines to perform certain tasks.

Toward this end, God has given me the _shadow_ of any idea on how to get every language into translation and on how to quickly update old translations  with modern language. Translation work will continue until Christ returns. He told us to go make disciples of all the nations. We are a long way from completing our God-given assignment.

To me, everything I've described is incredibly exciting. Even apart from carrying out Christ's Great Commission, those who participate in Wycliffe's work are literally writing history. We don't boast enough about this. Certainly we would not boast to be prideful, but to get people excited about how God's Word changes the world in ways that are worth celebrating. I am living proof of the power of God's Word. I boast in that in the name of Jesus here today, and I'm excited to be able to extend the invitation to join in this work to you.

Remember how Wycliffe was described as _grandma's organization_? There's a lot of truth in that. Our missionaries are aging and most of my partners are retired. Your grandparents built Wycliffe, and that's something to boast about. I bring an opportunity for young families to carry on their grandparent's legacy of generosity. I bring an opportunity to invest what God has given you in a high tech, dynamic, impactful, world-changing organization. Ask God if you can join me in this work. Your generosity enables us to do more translation work cheaper, more efficiently. That's exciting. We don't boast enough at Wycliffe. We don't boast about how when you partner with us, you know exactly where your money is going and you know exactly the impact it's having. A lot of non-profits can't boast like that. I wonder what their administrative costs are.

As a computer programmer, I am naturally excited about software and machines. Programmers are writers, and writing is my preferred mode of self expression. But software is not what excites me about Wycliffe. I am excited about Wycliffe because of the opportunities it brings. Wycliffe brings opportunities for anyone looking to serve God in some way. This service may come in the form of financially partnering with a missionary like me, or maybe you are called to serve. That's how I came to Wycliffe, at the invitation of a missionary speaking at my church just like I'm doing here today. We are actively recruiting and we need people much younger than me to join in this work. It is well worth your time and money.

### Prayer requests:

Ask God for...

- Financially responsible, young supporters
- A formal support-raising agreement with the administration
- More Christian programmers

Thank you all and thank you to Pastor Jim who allowed me to be here today. May God raise up young missionaries from within this church and the CALC denomination. May God raise up young, financially prudent supporters. May he show us all how to support and enable those who come after me. I boast that I am living proof of the power of God's Word. May you join me in this. May his glory reflect off of you and Victory Lutheran church!

### Peace be with you,

## Dan
